## 4. Insights into G protein-coupled receptors {.page_break_before}
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest family of membrane proteins encoded in the human genome.
They translate extracellular cues, including hormones, neurotransmitters, volatile odorants or light into intracellular signaling via a conformational change catalyzing the exchange of GDP with GTP on associated heterotrimeric G proteins.
This leads to dissociation of the Gα subunit and initiation of downstream signaling cascades.
GPCR signaling is further modulated by specific GPCR kinases and β-arrestins, which mediate receptor desensitization, internalization and G-protein independent signaling.

-- or a bit shorter --
They translate extracellular cues, including hormones, neurotransmitters, volatile odorants or light into intracellular signaling via a conformational change, resulting in G-protein activation. Signaling is further regulated by GPCR kinases and β-arrestins, which control desensitization, internalization and alternative signaling pathways.

Because GPCRs their extracellular accessibility and central role in numerous physiological processes, the represent important targets for pharmaceutical compounds with one third of all FDA approved drugs targeting GPCRs. 
This includes drugs against cardiovascular diseases, cancer and neurological conditions, as well as the blockbuster drug semaglutide for diabetes.
Furthermore, their structural versatility enables novel drug designs like selective allosteric modulators and bitoptic ligands, increasing therapeutic precision and allowing for biased signaling.
[@DOI:10.1038/s41392-024-01803-6]

The membrane association and low expression levels of GPCRs present significant challenges to MS-based proteomics, but recent advances have enabled the investigation of diverse aspects of GPCR signaling. 
This includes post translational-modifications, ligand-induces conformational changes, protein-interaction networks and the identification of drug binding sites, supporting the development of novel, more sensitive and mechanism-based therapeutics acting on GPCR signaling.

For instance, an enrichment tag was genetically fused to the gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) receptor, a GPCR stimulating insulin release, to overcome limiting protein coverage.
This significantly increased the number of peptides measured from the receptor and enabled the identification of eight phosphorylation sites, mainly on the C-terminal receptor tail.
Quantification of phosphorylation states after stimulation with native GIP or the recently approved antidiabetic drug trizepatide identified upregulation at four sites.
Interestingly, a distinct fifth site was phosphorylated upon drug treatment, revealing unanticipated functional differences.[@DOI:10.1021/jacs.3c09078]

To study protein interactions and internalization dynamics of the μ-opioid receptor (μOR), researchers developed a novel spatial proximity-labeling workflow capable of inferring the subcellular localization of the receptor based on enrichment levels of spatial bystanders characteristic for specific organelles.
This approach was applied to stimulation with three distinct μOR agonists, identifying ligand-dependent receptor trafficking dynamics and proximal interaction networks.
For example, μOR stimulated with the synthetic DAMGO peptide exhibited much faster internalization kinetics compared with morphine treatment.
Additionally, EYA4 and KCTD13 were identified as novel network components modulating μOR signaling in a G-protein activation dependent manner. [@DOI:10.1038/s41589-024-01588-3]

Recently, a LiP-MS-based approach was used to study the conformational changes in the adenosine 2A receptor upon G-protein coupling and treatment with ligands of differing pharmacology (angonist/antagonist/allosteric modulator).
Because of their membrane association, GPRRs do not have many tryptic sites, especially in their transmembrane domain. The protein coverage was increased significantly by adding an additional proteolysis step, enabling the generation of conformational fingerprints upon stimulation.
Dimensionality reduction of these fingerprints revealed clustering based on the pharmacology of the ligand, showcasing the potential of structural proteomics methods to study GPCRs. [@DOI:10.1021/jacs.4c03922]

[@DOI:10.1038/s41592-020-01022-1; @DOI:10.1021/jacs.3c09078; @DOI:10.1038/s41586-022-04547-x; @DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.4c06994; @DOI:10.1021/jacs.0c11837; @DOI:10.1021/acsomega.3c02737; @DOI:10.1038/s41557-022-01041-9; @DOI:10.1016/j.str.2024.10.004; @DOI:10.1021/jacs.4c03922]

new sources:
[@DOI:10.1038/s41589-024-01588-3; @DOI:10.1038/s41392-024-01803-6; @DOI:10.1021/jacs.4c03922]